In this lecture, I want to walk you
through the process of taking a regular
Matplotlib plot and applying Tufte's
principles of data-ink ratio and
char junk to make it
just a little bit better.
I'm going to walk through all of
the steps using the Jupiter notebooks and
you're welcome to follow along.
But if you want a bit more of a challenge,
I'll be including in video
quizzes along the way which prompts you
to solve the problem before I address.
This is good practice.
The video will pause and
you can do a quick Google to try and
find an appropriate API for
solving a specific issue.
You can try it out in the system, then you
can compare it to my solution right after.
Let's get started.
We use a plot of data on the popularity of
programming languages
taken from stack overflow.
Here there are five different languages,
Python, SQL, Java, C++, and JavaScript.
We'll find their positions as a rank
using NumPy as a range function.
And here are the popularity
values from stack overflow.
We'll create a bar chart based on rank and
popularity, then add x and y ticks and
set a title.
Then when we call plot.show,
the figure will render.
Okay, here's the first challenge.
The tics along both axis are annoying and
sort of clutter the document up a bit.
And the labels on the y axis
really should be direct.
So let's remove all of these.
I use the tic param's method of plot
to turn them all off except for
the bottom label.
It's nice to have a single function
which can handle all of this.
Now our plot still has
this frame around it, but
it's not really necessary and
it seems a little heavyweight.
Let's remove that ink.
This is a bit more involved, but
we can get the current axis,
then iterate through all the spine,
setting their visibility to false.
Already, this chart looks
much more lightweight.
Now, the blue is okay,
but it doesn't really help us
differentiate between the bars at all.
How about we soften all of
the hard blacks to gray,
then we change the bar
colors to gray as well.
Also, let's keep the Python bar
the same color of blue that
it was originally to make it stand out.
Okay, so there are several different
ways that we could do this.
The way I chose was to add
an alpha parameter to everything,
which adds a bit of transparency and
softens the colors up a bit.
I also set the bars themselves to
a neutral gray color then chose
a nice blue from the Python website
to accentuate the first bar.
Of course, we've actually made the chart
a little bit less accurate right
now since we don't have any y labels.
Let's fix this and
remove the y axis label and
just directly label the individual bars.
We don't really need the y axis label,
since the title tells
us everything we need to know
about the units in this chart.
Removing the label is easy, but changing
the bars is a little bit of a pain.
For this we want to iterate over each
of the bars and grab its height.
Then we want to create a new text
object with the data information.
Unfortunately, this means doing
a little bit of playing with padding.
Here I'll set up the x location to the bar
x plus the width divided by two and
the y location to be
the bar height minus five.
It might seem weird to get the middle
of the bar in the x dimension, but
that's because I'm setting the label
to center itself, horizontally.
And that's all there is to it.
A simple series of steps to make your
bar charts little bit more usable.
You could find a full notebook for
this example and
the course [INAUDIBLE] system directory.
When you were looking at this,
did you find a different way to do things?
Or do you think there's other places that
we could go to make this more readable and
increase the improvements?
Feel free to go into the discussion
forums and share them with me and
your classmates.